Re-add superchainERC20 FMA in a single PR for FMA review (#188)
ethereum-optimism/design-docs: security/fma-superchainerc20.md

<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->

**Table of Contents** *generated with [DocToc](https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc)*

- [**SuperchainERC20 standard-only FMA (Failure Modes and Recovery Path Analysis)**](#superchainerc20-standard-only-fma-failure-modes-and-recovery-path-analysis)
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Failure Modes and Recovery Paths](#failure-modes-and-recovery-paths)
  - [FM1: Unauthorized Access to `crosschainMint` & `crosschainBurn` Functions](#fm1-unauthorized-access-to-crosschainmint--crosschainburn-functions)
  - [FM2: Different Token Addresses Across Chains](#fm2-different-token-addresses-across-chains)
  - [FM3: Same Token Address but Different (or Malicious) Implementations](#fm3-same-token-address-but-different-or-malicious-implementations)
- [Action Items](#action-items)
- [Audit Requirements](#audit-requirements)
- [Additional Notes](#additional-notes)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## **SuperchainERC20 standard-only FMA (Failure Modes and Recovery Path Analysis)**

| Author | Ng, Joxes |
| --- | --- |
| Created at | 2024-10-02 |

> | Needs Approval From | Mark Tyneway, Matt Solomon, and 0age |
> | Other Reviewers | - |

Author: ```suggestion
| Needs Approval From | Mark Tyneway, Matt Solomon |
| Other Reviewers | Michael Amadi |
```

Similar to ERC20, implementations SuperchainERC20 should be considered untrusted by default, as the implementations of `crosschainMint` and `crosschainBurn` methods are not constrained by IERC7802 or the SuperchainERC20 implementation. As a result, failure modes resulting from malicious implementations of SuperchainERC20 are not considered here.

## Failure Modes and Recovery Paths

### FM1: Unauthorized Access to `crosschainMint` & `crosschainBurn` Functions

- **Description:** The `crosschainMint` and `crosschainBurn` functions can only be called by the `SuperchainTokenBridge`,  enforced by the check `msg.sender != Predeploys.SUPERCHAIN_TOKEN_BRIDGE`. If the bridge address is badly defined or the modifier bypassed, an entity could mint and burn tokens.
- **Risk Assessment**: Medium.
    - Potential impact: High. All tokens based on this implementation could be potentially at risk.
    - Likelihood: Very Low. `Predeploys.SUPERCHAIN_TOKEN_BRIDGE` is defined via protocol upgrades. The conditional is sufficiently simple and battle-tested to give confidence in the implementation.

> - **Mitigation**: There are tests for this authorization check, and tests that the `SuperchainTokenBridge` predeploy is correctly set during the interop fork upgrade, and isn’t subject to unexpected changes. Additionally, users should check that the `SuperchainTokenBridge` predeploy is correctly deployed and configured before trusting it to mint and burn their token.

Author: @Joxess to add links to the tests mentioned here

- **Detection**: Existing off-chain scripts for token monitoring should be enough to detect any unauthorized mint or burn actions triggered by this method.

> - **Recovery Path(s)**: Equivocation on `SuperchainTokenBridge` address would require a protocol upgrade or hard fork. Very unlikely to need it.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Recovery Path(s)**: Equivocation (i.e. another implementation being set) on the `SuperchainTokenBridge` address would require a protocol upgrade or hard fork to restore the expected code.
```

### FM2: Different Token Addresses Across Chains

- Description: For the `SuperchainTokenBridge` to validate mints and burns correctly, the `SuperchainERC20` must be deployed at the same address across all interoperable chains. If different addresses are used, the bridge will be unable to successfully finalize the cross-chain transfer.
- Risk Assessment: Medium
    - Potential impact: High. Inconsistent token addresses will disable interoperability functionalities for the contract.
    - Likelihood: Very Low. The interoperable set of chains follows the same opcode behavior and ensures identical availability of deployer contracts, such as `create2Deployer`. Developers are encouraged not to use well-known flagged deployment methods, such as `CREATE`, for these purposes.
- **Mitigation**: For developers, ensure to employ the appropiate deterministic deployment tools, such as the one at `create2Deployer`.
- **Detection**: Verify contract addresses upon deployment.
- **Recovery Path(s)**: Redeploy token contracts correctly.

> ### FM3: Same Token Address but Different (or Malicious) Implementations

Author: For FM2 and FM3, there are some open questions:
1. Do we want to merge FM2 and FM3 into a single invariant of "SuperchainERC20 Tokens MUST have the same code at the same address across all chains in the interoperable set". 
2. Or, do we want to support having the same token address but with different implementations, for use cases such as a gov token has a primary chain and a simpler implementaiton when bridged to other chains. If that use case is something we need to support, FM3 isn't actually a failure mode, and becomes a user-level concern (i.e. user has to verify if implementation on destination chain is safe)

This is similar to the above paragraph:

> Similar to ERC20, implementations SuperchainERC20 should be considered untrusted by default, as the implementations of `crosschainMint` and `crosschainBurn` methods are not constrained by IERC7802 or the SuperchainERC20 implementation. As a result, failure modes resulting from malicious implementations of SuperchainERC20 are not considered here.

In other words, we want to decide whether this is a protocol-level failure mode that should have detection and mitigation (i.e. we are responsible for ensuring same code at same address is always attainable) or a user-level failure mode where users must verify all implementations for a token are not malicious

    - Likelihood: Low. This is possible if the deployer engages in poor practices or lacks opsec. Two examples of this are:
        - The use of custom factories that utilize CREATE and share the same address, where tokens are deployed using the same bytecode and nonce.
        - Proxy contracts where the admin is compromised.
- **Mitigation**: For developers, ensure the use of appropriate deterministic deployment tools, such as `create2Deployer`. In the case of proxy contracts, ensure proper control over their deployments and ownership.
- **Detection**: Verify deployments at the designated address to check the bytecode and ensure it matches its counterpart on other chains or the intended version.
- **Recovery Path(s)**: Pause the token contract where possible. Upgrade if feasible, or redeploy if necessary.

## Action Items

Given the small scope, there is no need for relevant actions beyond resolving all comments, and continuing code implementation and testing.

## Audit Requirements

> No audit should be required, as it is simple and isn’t expected to have dependencies or impact on other core OP contracts. In any case, an audit over the whole system is expected, including the `SuperchainERC20` contract.

Author: This is part of the upcoming audit so let's update this text

## Additional Notes

> The proposed implementation of the standard doesn’t prevent a token issuer from using other token standards, such as xERC20, with the `SuperchainTokenBridge` to mint and burn tokens across an [interoperable set of chains](https://specs.optimism.io/interop/overview.html). More about this is explained in [xERC20-ERC7802 compatilibility](https://defi-wonderland.notion.site/xERC20-ERC7802-compatibility-14c9a4c092c780ca94a8cb81e980d813).

Author: Let's move this into the intro section for visibility
